>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
TONIGHT: A SPY TO BE SET FREE--
ISRAELI-AMERICAN JONATHAN
POLLARD GETS PAROLE AFTER 30
YEARS BEHIND BARS IN THE U.S.
>> Ifill: THEN, REVISITING THE
NUCLEAR BOMB, 70 YEARS LATER.
THE LINGERING HEALTH CONCERNS
FOR A COMMUNITY DOWNWIND OF
AMERICA'S FIRST TEST SITE.
>> WE WERE THE FIRST PEOPLE THAT
THE ATOMIC BOMB WAS USED ON.
THE GOVERNMENT CAME INTO OUR
BACKYARD AND USED US AS GUINEA
PIGS.
>> Woouff:dr PLUS, THE CRIMINALS
WHO RULE THE LAWLESS SEAS.
CHASING DOWN THE WORLD'S MOST
WANTED IN DANGEROUS WATERS.
>> Ifill: ALL THAT AND MORE ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: NATO AMBASSADORS
CONVENED A RARE EMERGENCY
MEETING TODAYN BR IUSSELS ON THE
ISLAMIC STATE THREAT IN TURKEY,
AFTER A STRING OF ATTACKS.
REPRESENTATIVES FROM 28 NATIONS
GATHERED AT NATO HEADQUARTERS
FOR THE SPECIAL SESSION, AT
TURKEY'S REQUEST.
AFTERWARD, THE ALLIANCE'S
SECRETARY-GENERAL SPOKE TO
REPORTERS.
>> ALL ALLIES STAND IN
SOLIDARITY WITH TURKEY.
WE STRONGLY CONDEMN THE
TERRORIST ATTACKS.
WE EXPRESS OUR CONDOLENCES TO
THE TURKISH GOVERNMENT AND TO
THE FAMILIES OF THE VICTIMS IN
SURUC AND OTHER ATTACKS AGAINST
POLICE AND MILITARY OFFICERS.
>> Ifill: AT THE SAME TIME,
TURKEY FACED MORE VIOLENCE FROM
KURDISH MILITANTS.
A TURKISH SOLDIER WAS SHOT IN
THE HEAD NEAR THE BORDER WITH
IRAQ.
IN RETALIATION, TURKISH JETS HIT
KURDISH REBEL SITES IN THE
SOUTHEAST.
PRESIDENT RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN
SAID THE PEACE PROCESS WITH
KURDS IS ON HOLD FOR NOW.
KURDS IS ON HOLD FOR NOW. >> (
translated): I DON'T
THINK
>> (translated): I
DON'T THINK IT'S POSSIBLE TO
CONTINUE A
IT'S POSSIBLE TO CONTINUE A
PEACE PROCESS WITH THOSE WHO
TAKE AIM AT OUR NATIONAL
SECURITY AND BROTHERHOOD.
THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN NATIONAL
UNITY AND BROTHERHOOD.
BROTHERHOOD COMES ABOVE THE
PEACE PROCESS.
>> Ifill: THE KURDISTAN WORKERS
PARTY-- OR P.K.K.-- SAID THE
AIRSTRIKES AGAINST THEM RENDERED
THE PEACE PROCESS MEANINGLESS.
BUT THEY STOPPED SHORT OF
FORMALLY PULLING OUT.
THE P.K.K. AND ITS AFFILIATES
ARE PART OF THE EFFORT TO FIGHT
ISIS IN SYRIA.
>> Woodruff: OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS TODAY
MADE THEIR SECOND PITCH TO
CONGRESS OVER THE IRAN NUCLEAR
DEAL-- THIS TIME BEFORE THE
HOUSE FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE.
>> THERE ARE CONCLUSIONS THAT
HAVE BEEN DRAWN THAT DON'T IN
FACT MATCH WITH THE REALITY OF
WHAT THIS DEAL SETS FORTH.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY BEGAN HIS TESTIMONY
WELL AWARE HE'D FACE CHALLENGING
QUESTIONS FROM LAWMAKERS OVER
THE NUCLEAR DEAL WITH IRAN.
HE WAS JOINED BY ENERGY
SECRETARY ERNEST MONIZ, AND
TREASURY SECRETARY JACK LEW.
COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN ED ROYCE
CLAIMED THE DEAL, WHICH LIFTS
SANCTIONS ON IRAN IN RETURN FOR
CURBS ON ITS NUCLEAR PROGRAM,
WOULD ONLY STRENGTHEN TEHRAN.
>> IF THIS AGREEMENT GOES
THROUGH, IRAN GETS A CASH
BONANZA, A BOOST TO ITS
INTERNATIONAL STANDING, AND A
LIGHTED PATH TOWARD NUCLEAR
WEAPONS.
>> Woodruff: KERRY-- AS HE HAS
REPEATEDLY-- EQUATED WALKING
AWAY FROM THE DEAL TO GIVING
IRAN A FAST-TRACK TO THE BOMB
BUT HE HAD A HARD TIME MAKING
HIS POINTS:
>> YOU KNOW, WE HEAR THESE
COMPLAINTS, WE HEAR, "WELL, THIS
AGREEMENT DOESN'T DO THIS.
IT DOESN'T STOP THEIR TERROR,
THIS AGREEMENT'S GONNA GIVE THEM
SOME MONEY, THIS AGREEMENT'S
GONNA DO THIS."
WHAT THIS AGREEMENT IS SUPPOSED
TO DO IS STOP THEM FROM HAVING A
NUCLEAR WEAPON.
NOW I WANT TO HEAR SOMEBODY TELL
ME HOW THEY'RE GOING TO DO THAT
WITHOUT THIS AGREEMENT.
WHAT'S THE NEXT STEP FOR THE
UNITED STATES?
NOBODY'S ANSWERING THAT
QUESTION.
>> Woodruff: AT TIMES, KERRY WAS
VISIBLY FRUSTRATED AS LAWMAKERS
PEPPERED HIM WITH THEIR DOUBTS
ABOUT THE DEAL.
>> YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED.
I'VE SUGGESTED TO THE MEMBERS--
ASK THE QUESTIONS AND LEAVE TIME
FOR RESPONSE.
>> Woodruff: MEMBERS FROM BOTH
PARTIES ALSO EXPRESSED CONCERN
OVER THE FATES OF FOUR AMERICANS
IN IRAN-- THREE HELD BY THE
REGIME, ONE WHEREABOUTS UNKNOWN-
- AND OVER IRAN'S SUPPORT FOR
MILITANT GROUPS.
>> THEY SUPPORT HAMAS, HEZBOLLAH
AND HOUTHI, AND THOSE ARE JUST
THE ORGANIZATIONS THAT BEGIN
WITH THE LETTER "H".
>> Woodruff: CONGRESS BEGAN A
60-DAY REVIEW PERIOD ON THE DEAL
LAST WEEK, AND SECRETARY KERRY
LEAVES LATER THIS WEEK FOR THE
MIDDLE EAST TO DISCUSS THE
AGREEMENT WITH ARAB ALLIES.
THE DEAL DID PICK UP CRITICAL
SUPPORT TODAY FROM DEMOCRATIC
REPRESENTATIVE SANDER LEVIN OF
MICHIGAN.
HE'S JEWISH AND A STRONG
SUPPORTER OF ISRAEL.
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU HAS CALLED THE
AGREEMENT A "HISTORIC MISTAKE".
>> Ifill: IN HIS LAST DAY ON THE
CONTINENT, PRESIDENT OBAMA
PUSHED AFRICAN LEADERS TO DO
THEIR PART TO MAKE AFRICA MORE
STABLE AND ECONOMICALLY
ATTRACTIVE.
DURING A SPEECH DURING THE
AFRICAN UNION IN ETHIOPIA, THE
PRESIDENT CALLED ON HIS
COUNTERPARTS TO SUPPORT HUMAN
RIGHTS, PRIORITIZE JOB CREATION
AND CLEAN UP CORRUPTION.
>> NOTHING WILL UNLOCK AFRICA'S
ECONOMIC POTENTIAL MORE THAN
ENDING THE CANCER OF CORRUPTION.
WHEN SOMEONE HAS TO PAY A BRIBE
JUST TO START A BUSINESS OR GO
TO SCHOOL OR GET AN OFFICIAL TO
DO THE JOB THEY ARE SUPPOSED TO
BE DOING ANYWAY, THAT'S NOT THE
AFRICAN WAY.
IT UNDERMINES THE DIGNITY OF THE
PEOPLE YOU REPRESENT.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT ALSO
SAID, "NOBODY SHOULD BE
PRESIDENT FOR LIFE"-- REMARKS
AIMED AT AFRICAN LEADERS WHO
HAVE HELD ONTO POWER LONG AFTER
THEIR TERMS EXPIRE.
>> Woodruff: THE SON OF LATE
LIBYAN DICTATOR MOAMMAR GADHAFI
WAS SENTENCED TO DEATH BY FIRING
SQUAD TODAY IN TRIPOLI.
SAIF AL-ISLAM GADHAFI WAS
CONVICTED OF WAR CRIMES
COMMITTED DURING THE 2011
UPRISING THAT FORCED HIS FATHER
OUT OF OFFICE.
GADHAFI'S SON WAS NOT IN THE
COURTROOM WHEN THE RULING WAS
HANDED DOWN.
HE'S BEEN HELD FOR FOUR YEARS BY
A MILITIA IN WESTERN LIBYA THAT
HAS REFUSED TO HAND HIM OVER.
>> Ifill: BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
AN UPSTATE NEW YORK PRISON
WORKER PLEADED GUILTY TODAY TO
HELPING TWO KILLERS ESCAPE.
JOYCE MITCHELL WEPT AS SHE
ENTERED HER PLEA TODAY IN
PLATTSBURGH.
THE FORMER PRISON TAILOR
ADMITTED TO SMUGGLING HACKSAW
BLADES AND OTHER TOOLS TO THE
MEN INSIDE FROZEN HAMBURGER
MEAT.
RICHARD MATT AND DAVID SWEAT'S
DARING PRISON BREAK LAST MONTH
TRIGGERED A THREE-WEEK MANHUNT.
MITCHELL COULD FACE UP TO SEVEN
YEARS IN PRISON.
HER SENTENCING IS SET FOR LATE
SEPTEMBER.
>> Woodruff: MORE THAN A
THOUSAND SCIENTISTS AND TECH
EXPERTS WARNED TODAY OF THE
DANGER OF AN ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE ARMS RACE.
IN A OPEN LETTER, THE
SIGNATORIES CALLED FOR A BAN ON
AUTONOMOUS WEAPONS THAT ARE
BEYOND MEANINGFUL HUMAN CONTROL.
TECHNOLOGY COULD MAKE ROBOTS ON
BATTLEFIELDS A REALITY WITHIN
YEARS, NOT DECADES.
STEPHEN HAWKING, APPLE CO-
FOUNDER STEVE WOZNIAK AND ELON
MUSK, THE C.E.O. OF TESLA
MOTORS, WERE AMONG THOSE WHO
SIGNED THE LETTER.
>> Ifill: ARCHEOLOGISTS IN
JAMESTOWN, VIRGINIA HAVE
DISCOVERED THE REMAINS OF FOUR
OF THE FIRST COLONIAL LEADERS IN
AMERICA.
THE BURIAL SITES WERE FOUND IN
2013 IN THE EARTHEN FLOOR NEAR
THE ALTAR OF WHAT'S LEFT OF
AMERICA'S FIRST PROTESTANT
CHURCH.
THE MEN WERE BURIED BETWEEN 1608
AND 1610 ALONGSIDE VARIOUS
ARTIFACTS-- A RARE PRACTICE AT
THE TIME.
IT INCLUDED A SMALL SILVER BOX
WITH BONE FRAGMENTS AND A HOLY
WATER CONTAINER-- A MYSTERIOUS
CATHOLIC FIND FOR THE ANGLICAN
RELIGION OF THE COLONY.
>> Woodruff: THE NATIONAL
FOOTBALL LEAGUE OFFICIALLY HAS
ITS FIRST FEMALE COACH.
THE ARIZONA CARDINALS HIRED 37-
YEAR-OLD JEN WELTER TO COACH
INSIDE LINEBACKERS DURING THEIR
PRE-SEASON TRAINING CAMP.
WELTER-- WHO HAS A P.H.D IN
PSYCHOLOGY-- PREVIOUSLY COACHED
AND PLAYED FOR THE INDOOR
FOOTBALL LEAGUE'S TEXAS
REVOLUTION TEAM.
>> Ifill: THE FOUR-GAME
SUSPENSION AGAINST NEW ENGLAND
PATRIOTS QUARTERBACK TOM BRADY
WILL STAND.
HE WAS SUSPENDED BY THE LEAGUE
FOR HIS ROLE IN USING
UNDERINFLATED FOOTBALLS DURING
LAST SEASON'S A.F.C.
CHAMPIONSHIP GAME.
BRADY AND THE TEAM HAVE DENIED
THE CHARGES.
N.F.L. COMMISSIONER ROGER
GOODELL ALSO SAID TODAY THAT
BRADY HAD HIS CELL PHONE
DESTROYED ON THE DAY HE WAS DUE
TO MEET WITH AN INDEPENDENT
INVESTIGATOR IN THE
"DEFLATEGATE" SCANDAL.
>> Woodruff: A WAVE OF STRONG
CORPORATE EARNINGS REPORTS
COUPLED WITH A RISE IN THE PRICE
OF OIL BOOSTED STOCKS ON WALL
STREET TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED MORE THAN 189 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 17,630.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 49 POINTS AND
THE S&P 500 ADDED 25.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR: PAROLE R JOFONATHAN
POLLARD AFTER 30 YEARS IN JAIL
FOR SPYING FOR ISRAEL, THE BOY
SCOUTS OF AMERICA LIFT A BAN ON
GAY SCOUT LEADERS, BUT ALLOWS
RELIGIOUS EXEMPTIONS, THE CITY
OF BOSTON TERMINATES ITS BID FOR
THE 2024 OLYMPICS, WHY PLAYING
HOST DOESN'T ALWAYS PAY OFF AND
MUCH MORE.
>> Woodruff: LAWYERS FOR
CONVICTED SPY JONATHAN POLLARD
ANNOUNCED TODAY THAT THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT WILL BE GRANTING THE
60-YEAR-OLD PAROLE.
THE FORMER NAVAL INTELLIGENCE
ANALYST WAS CONVICTED OF SELLING
CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
TO ISRAEL, AND HAS BEEN IN
PRISON FOR NEARLY 30 YEARS.
ISRAELI LEADERS HAVE BEEN ASKING
FOR POLLARD'S RELEASE FOR
DECADES.
REPORTER DEVLIN BARRET HAS BEEN
COVERING THE STORY FOR "THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL" AND JOINS ME
NOW.
WELCOME BACK TO THE PROGRAM.
>> HI, THANKS.
>> Woodruff: REMIND US WHO
JONATHAN POLLARD IS AND WHY HE
WAS SENT TO PRISON, LIFE.
>> HE WAS SENTENCED TO LIFE
AFTER, IN 1985, HE WAS ARRESTED
AND CHARGED WITH PASSING
SUITCASES OF CLASSIFIED
DOCUMENTS FROM HIS WORK AT THE
NAVY TO THE ISRAELIS, AND IT WAS
AN AMAZING CASE IN A LOT OF WAYS
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW, THE U.S. IS
VERY CLOSE TO ISRAEL AND,
TRADITIONALLY SPEAKING, THE U.S.
FEELS NATIONS THAT ARE THIS
CLOSE DON'T SPY ON EACH OTHER
THIS AGGRESSIVELY.
WHEN HE WAS SENTENCED IN THE
NAVY H HE RECEIVED A LIFE
SENTENCE AND SET OFF DECADE OF
DISAGREEMENT AND PRESSURE FROM
ISRAEL TO RELEASE HIM BEFORE HE
DIED.
>> Woodruff: HE PLEADED
GUILTY.
>> RIGHT.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WAS THE
ARGUMENT BY ISRAEL THAT HE
SHOULD BE ABLE TO LEAVE?
>> HE WAS SPAWNED FOR AN ALLY.
HE DIDN'T ACTUALLY HARM U.S.
NATIONAL SECURITY THE SAME WAY A
SPY FOR THE SOVIET UNION WOULD
BECAUSE THOSE SECRETS WERE TAKEN
BY A FRIENDLY NATION.
I THINK ONE OF THE QUIRKS OF THE
POLLARD CASE IS, IN A LOT OF SPY
CASES, WE SWAP THEM FOR OUR OWN
AGENTS THAT WE WANT BACK.
FOR POLLARD, UNLUCKILY, I GUESS,
THERE WAS NO ONE EVER TO SWAP
FOR HIM, SO THAT'S PART OF THE
REASON HE'S REMAINED IN PRISON
ALL THIS TIME.
>> Woodruff: HOW MUCH IS KNOWN
ABOUT WHAT WAS IN THE MATERIAL
THAT HE TOOK AND GAVE TO ISRAEL?
>> THE DEFENSE SECRETARY AT THE
TIME, CASPER WEINBERGER, SAID HE
COULD NOT IMAGINE A CASE THAT
DID MORE HARM TO NATIONAL
SECURITY.
I THINK THERE IS SOME DEBATE
WITHIN THE INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITY ABOUT THAT BECAUSE
CERTAINLY SPICE LIKE ALDRIDGE
AMES ARE CREDITED WITH GIVING UP
INFORMATION THAT DIRECTLY LED TO
DEATHS OF AGENTS AND GOT PEOPLE
KILLED.
THAT BE A DEBATE AROUND POLLARD
THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS NEVER
SPECIFICALLY MADE THAT
ACCUSATION AGAINST HIM.
>> Woodruff: TODAY THE U.S.
PAROLE BOARD IS SAYING THERE IS
NO CONNECTION BETWEEN THIS
DECISION TO LET HIM OUT IN
NOVEMBER AND WHAT'S GOING ON
WITH IRAN.
THE ISRAELIS, OBVIOUSLY, VERY
UPSET WITH THE U.S.'S DEAL ON
NUCLEAR WEAPONS WITH IRAN.
YOU TALKED TO U.S. OFFICIALS WHO
GIVE YOU DIFFERENT --
>> I SPOKE TO MULTIPLE U.S.
OFFICIALS WHO BELIEVE THERE IS
SOME CONNECTION, THAT THAT'S NOT
THE SOLE REASON, BUT PART OF THE
THINKING BEHIND RELEASING HIM
NOW.
I WILL SAY THAT OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS
ADAMANTLY DENY THAT AS BEING IN
ANY WAY RELATED TO A FOREIGN
POLICY CONSIDERATION.
WHAT'S SORT OF FUNNY ABOUT THAT
IS IF THAT WERE TRUE, THAT WOULD
BE THE FIRST TIME IN THIS MAN'S
LIFE MAYBE IN 30 YEARS, THAT HE
WASN'T PART OF A FOREIGN POLICY
DISCUSSION.
HE'S BASICALLY BEEN A HUMAN
BARGAINING CHIP FOR THE LAST 20
YEARS.
>> Woodruff: IS THIS SUPPOSED
TO HAVE A SOL DARE EFFECT ON
U.S.-ISRAELI RELATIONS?
>> I THINK IT COULD, BUT I THINK
ANYONE WHO THINKS THIS
SIGNIFICANTLY AFFECT THE WAY
ISRAEL VIEWS THE IRAN DEAL IS
MISTAKEN, THAT IT MAY CREATE
SOME GOOD WILL JUST IN THE
GENERAL ISRAELI POPULATION,
MAYBE AMONG ISRAELI LEADERS,
BUT, IN THE END, IRAN IS BIGGER
THAN POLLARD.
AS IMPORTANT AS POLLARD MAY BE
TO ISRAEL, THE IRAN DEAL IS
SIMPLY BIGGER THAN POLLARD.
>> Woodruff: WHAT HAPPENS TO
JONATHAN POLLARD ONCE HE GETS
OUT OF PRISON?
>> ME VERY MUCH WANTS TO GOAS T
DECIDE WHETHER TO LET HIM DO
THAT.
HIS LAWYERS SAID, IF HE CAN'T
LEAVE THE COUNTRY, WHICH IS
SOMETIMES A CONDITION OF PAROLE,
HE WILL MOVE TO THE NEW YORK
AREA.
>> Woodruff: BUT THAT HAS TO
BE WORKED OUT.
>> THAT'S STILL TO BE WORKED
OUT.
HIS OFFICIAL RELEASE DATE IS
NOVEMBER, SO THERE'S A LITTLE
TIME TO WORK THAT OUT, STILL.
>> Woodruff: ALL RIGHT, DEVLIN
BARRETT WITH THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AFTER YEARS OF DEBATE,
THE BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA VOTED
LAST NIGHT TO END A BAN ON ADULT
LEADERS WHO ARE OPENLY GAY.
THE POLICY STILL WOULD ALLOW
CHURCH-SPONSORED SCOUT UNITS TO
MAINTAIN AN EXCLUSION FOR
RELIGIOUS REASONS.
THE SCOUTS DECIDED TWO YEARS AGO
TO ALLOW OPENLY GAY YOUTH.
SEVERAL RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS
ARE EITHER APPREHENSIVE OR
OPPOSE THE NEW POLICY, INCLUDING
THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST
LATTER DAY SAINTS, WHICH
SPONSORS MORE SCOUT TROOPS THAN
ANY OTHER DENOMINATION.
MORMON LEADERS SAID IN A
STATEMENT THEY WILL RE-EXAMINE
THEIR TIES TO THE BOY SCOUTS.
WE INVITED SEVERAL RELIGIOUS
ORGANIZATIONS TO APPEAR TONIGHT,
BUT THEY DECLINED.
ZACH WAHLS IS THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR FOR SCOUTS FOR
EQUALITY.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
WELCOME.
SO HOW BIG A DEAL IS THIS?
WE'VE SEEN THIS COMING BIT BY
BIT FOR A TIME.
>> THIS IS AN HISTORIC STEP BY
THE BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA.
THEY FIRST IMPLEMENTED THIS
POLICY IN 1978, 37 YEARS AGO,
AND FOR THEM TO GO FROM THAT
POLIC WHIYCH THEY ADOPTED IN THE
'70s TO VOTING LAST NIGHT TO
END THE BAN, EVEN THOUGH THERE
IS A RELIGIOUS EXEMPTION, AS YOU
MENTIONED, STILL A PRETTY BIG
CHAPTER FOR THE BOY SCOUTS TO
MOVE ON TO.
>> Ifill: HOW DID IT HAPPEN?
WE HEARD ROBERT GATES USED TO BE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE NOW HEAD OF
THE BOY SCOUTS SAID MAINTAINING
THE OLD POLICY WAS NO LONGER
SUSTAINABLE.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN
"SUSTAINABLE"?
>> I THINK IN THIS CONTEXT GATES
WAS REFERRING TO THE FACT THE
BOY SCOUTS POLICY WAS UNDER
ESSENTIALLY ASSAULT FROM LEGAL
CHALLENGES BEING PACE PLACED IN
NEW YORK AND CHICAGO.
BUT ALSO THIS IS THE KIND OF
EVENT THAT WILL CREATE STORIES
THAT WILL ILLUSTRATE THE DAMAGE
THE BAN WAS CREATING.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN APRIL OF 2012,
JENNIFER TERRELL, FROM BRIDG
BRIDGEPORT, OHIO, WAS BANNED
FROM HER SON'S BOY SCOUT TROOP.
WE HEARD EARLIER IN NEW YORK A
GENTLEMAN HAD BEEN HIRED TO WORK
IN THEIR SUMMER CAMP AND UP
UNTIL THIS POINT THE BOY SCOUTS
REFUSED TO HIRE GAY ADULTS.
>> Ifill: WHAT KIND OF IMPACT
WILL THIS HAVE ON THE CULTURE OF
SCOUTING?
>> IT'S HARD TO SAY WITH
SPECIFICITY BECAUSE WE DON'T
HAVE ALLOWABLE POLLING DATA.
BUT SINCE JAMES GALE WAS REMOVED
IN 1990 FROM THE BOY SCOUTS, THE
BOY SCOUTS HAVE SEEN A
PRECIPITOUS DECLINE IN
MEMBERSHIP SINCE 1990.
>> Ifill: IN COMING TO THIS
AGREEMENT, THE BOY SCOUTS AGREED
TO ALLOW FOR EXEMPTIONS FOR
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS.
DO YOU FIND THAT ACCEPTABLE?
>> OUR POSITION IS
DISCRIMINATION AT ANY LEVEL
SENDS A HARMFUL MESSAGE TO
YOUTH, GAY OR STRAIGHT ALIKE,
AND DISCRIMINATION HAS NO PLACE
IN SCOUTING.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO RECOGNIZE THIS
IS A BIG CHANGE FOR THE BOY
SCOUTS AND MAKES SENSE TO FIND A
COMPROMISE WITH THEIR RELIGIOUS
PARTNERS.
>> Ifill: SO THE CHURCHES,
MORMONS AS WE DESCRIBED EARLIER,
THEY DECIDED TO PULL OUT OF BOY
SCOUTING ENTIRELY.
DOESN'T THAT UNDERMINE SCOUTING
AS WELL IS THIS.
>> WE HOPE THE MORMONS DON'T
LEAVE.
WE BELIEVE SCOUTING IS STRONGER
WHEN IT IS MORE DEVERSE FIDE IN
ITS MEMBERS.
WE THINK THE MORMONS, BAPTISTS,
CATHOLICS SHOULD STAY.
IT SHOULD BE OPEN TO EVERYONE
WHO IS WILLING TO LIVE BY THE
SCOUT LAW.
>> Ifill: SO THE HOPE IS
CONVERSATIONS WILL AGREE BETWEEN
YOU AND THE PEOPLE WHO BELIEVE
AS YOU AND THE CHURCH
ORGANIZATIONS?
>> YES.
>> Ifill: HAVE THERE BEEN
DISCUSSIONS?
>> WE'VE HEARD FROM THE YIEWN
TARRIAN ASSOCIATION WHICH SAYS
THEY WILL BE TRYING TO
REESTABLISH RELATIONSHIP WITH
THE BOY SCOUTS.
WE'RE ALSO REACHING OUT TO OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS INCLUDING THE
UNION FOR INFORMED JUDAISM.
WE HOPE THE CHURCH OF CHRIST
WILL INCREASE ITS COMMITMENT TO
THE BOY SCOUTS.
WE'RE EXCITED ABOUT BUILDING A
STRONGER, MORE INCLUSIVE BOY
SCOUTS MOVING FORWARD.
>> Ifill: WHAT DO YOU SAY TO
PEOPLE, WHETHER A SCOUT MEMBER
OR LEADER, THAT SEXUALITY
SHOULDN'T BE AN ISSUE IN THESE
CASES.
>> I AGREE SEXUALITY SHOULDN'T
BE AN ISSUE.
I HAVE TWO MOMS, JACKIE AND
TERRI, I DON'T KNOW IF THEY'RE
WATCHING AT HOME, BUT THEY WERE
A SMALL PART OF MY SCOUT
EXPERIENCE WHEN WE WERE GROWING
UP BECAUSE WE LIVED IN A
PROGRESSIVE COMMUNITY, BUT IN
BRIDGEPORT, OHIO, WHERE JENNIFER
TERRELL IS FROM, IT WAS AN
ISSUE.
NO SCOUT SHOULD BE DENIED
ENTRANCE BECAUSE THEIR PARENTS
ARE GAY.
>> Ifill: ZACH WAHLS,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF SCOUTS FOR
EQUALITY, THANK YOU FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANKS, GWEN.
>> Woodruff: HOSTING THE OLYMPIC
GAMES HAS BECOME A KIND OF
OLYMPIAN FEAT IN ITSELF.
MANY CITIES HAVE STRUGGLED WITH
IT, WHILE OTHERS HAVE SAID THE
OUTCOME IS WELL WORTH IT.
BUT BOSTON'S AMBIVALENCE ABOUT
HOSTING THE SUMMER GAMES AND THE
DECISION IT ANNOUNCED YESTERDAY
IS CASTING A FRESH SPOTLIGHT ON
THESE QUESTIONS.
>> THIS IS A COITMEMMNT THAT I
CANNOT MAKE WITHOUT ASSURANCES
THAT BOSTON AND ITS RESIDENTS
WILL BE PROTECTED.
>> Woodruff: WITH THAT
ANNOUNCEMENT YESTERDAY, BOSTON'S
BID TO HOST THE 2024 SUMMER
OLYMPICS CAME TO AN END.
MAYOR MARTY WALSH:
>> I REFUSE TO MORTGAGE THE
FUTURE OF THE CITY AWAY.
I REFUSE TO PUT BOSTON ON THE
HOOK FOR OVERRUNS.
AND I REFUSE TO COMMIT TO
SIGNING A GUARANTEE THAT USES
TAX PAYERS DOLLARS TO PAY FOR
THE OLYMPICS.
>> Woodruff: THE MOVE FOLLOWS A
MONTHS-LONG, MULTI-MILLION-
DOLLAR CAMPAIGN THAT PRECEDED
EVEN JANUARY'S SELECTION OF
BOSTON BY THE U.S. OLYMPIC
COMMITTEE AS AMERICA'S CANDIDATE
CITY.
HIGH PROFILE ATHLETES WITH
BOSTON TIES MADE PITCHES, AND
PLANNERS ENVISIONED VENUES
SPREAD ACROSS METRO BOSTON AND
THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS.
BUT THE BID SOURED SOON AFTER
BOSTON WAS PICKED.
AS BOSTONIANS LEARNED OF THE
COST DETAILS, THEIR SUPPORT
PLUMMETED.
IN A STATEMENT YESTERDAY,
THE U.S. OLYMPIC COMMITTEE'S
C.E.O., SCOTT BLACKMUN, SAID THE
U.S.O.C:
U.S. OLYMPIC OFFICIALS NOW HAVE
UNTIL SEPTEMBER 15TH TO NAME A
REPLACEMENT CANDIDATE CITY.
ONE POSSIBILITY IS LOS ANGELES,
WHICH HOSTED THE GAMES IN 1932
AND 1984, AND HAS ALREADY
EXPRESSED INTEREST.
THE U.S. HASN'T HOSTED A SUMMER
OLYMPICS SINCE ATLANTA IN 1996,
OR ANY OLYMPICS SINCE THE 2002
SALT LAKE CITY WINTER GAMES.
BOSTON'S DOUBTS AND DECISION
UNDERLINE THE GREAT COSTS BORNE
BY OLYMPIC HOST CITIES.
RIO DE JANIERO-- WHICH WILL HOLD
NEXT YEAR'S SUMMER GAMES-- IS
SPENDING ABOUT $12 BILLION ON
THE EVENT.
AND RUSSIA SPENT UPWARDS OF $50
BILLION TO ORGANIZE THE 2014
WINTER GAMES IN SOCHI.
THE QUESTION THAT MANY ARE
ASKING IN THE WAKE OF BOSTON IS
WHETHER IT ULTIMATELY IS WORTH
HOSTING A GAMES.
THERE ARE VARIOUS WAYS OF
MEASURING THAT AND WE GET TWO
DIFFERENT TAKES: GEORGE HIRTHLER
HAS BEEN A COMMUNICATIONS
STRATEGIST FOR TEN OLYMPIC
CAMPAIGNS, INCLUDING ATLANTA'S
SUCCESSFUL 1996 BID AND
VANCOUVER IN 2010.
AND ANDREW ZIMBALIST, A
PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS AT SMITH
COLLEGE AND AUTHOR OF THE BOOK
"CIRCUS MAXIMUS: THE ECONOMIC
GAMBLE BEHIND HOSTING THE
OLYMPICS AND THE WORLD CUP."
AND WE WELCOME BOTH OF YOU.
SO LET'S TALK ABOUT BOSTON
FIRST.
ANDREW ZIMBALIST, TO YOU, WHAT
WOULD YOU ADD TO WHAT WAS JUST
REPORTED ABOUT WHAT WENT WRONG
IN BOSTON?
WHY WERE THEY CHOSEN AND THEN
WHAT FELL APART?
>> I THINK, FROM THE VERY
BEGINNING WHEN BOSTON WAS
SELECTED BACK IN JANUARY -- AND
BY THE WAY, IT WAS SAID BOSTON
WAS SELECTED BECAUSE IT WAS THE
MOST WALKABLE OF THE FOUR
COMPETITORS.
EVER SINCE THE ANNOUNCEMENT WAS
MADE THAT BOSTON WAS SELECTED,
THE BOSTON '24 COMMITTEE CAME
OUT WITH A LOT OF INCOMPLETE,
DECEIVING AND
MISDIRECTION-ORIENTED
INFORMATION AND, OVER THE LAST
SEVERAL MONTHS, EVERY COUPLE OF
WEEKS, SOME NEW PIECE OF
INFORMATION HAS BEEN RELEASED
THAT I THINK HAS LESSENED THE
TRUST OF BOSTIANS AND SIT SENS
OF MASSACHUSETTS, WHO, AFTER
ALL, JUST A FEW YEARS AGO, WENT
THROUGH THE BIG DIG CONSTRUCTION
IN BOSTON WHICH WAS SUPPOSED TO
CAUSE $2 BILLION AND ENDED UP
COSTING OVER $20 BILLION.
>> Woodruff: GEORGE HIRTHLER,
ANYTHING TO ADD TO THAT ABOUT
WHAT WENT WRONG IN BOSTON?
>> WHAT WENT WRONG, JUDY, WAS
THE PUBLIC NARRATIVE PRETTY
MITCH CONTROLLED BY PROFESSOR
ZIMBALIST AND HIS CO-HEAR COHORF
COLLEAGUES.
THEY KEPT THE PUBLIC FOCUSED ON
THE FINANCIAL RISKS OF THE GAMES
SO THE PUBLIC NEVER HAD A CHANCE
TO CONSIDER WHAT IT WOULD BE
LIKE TO HAVE ATHLETES FROM 200
COUNTRIES AROUND THE WORLD
LIVING IN AN OLYMPIC VILLAGE IN
THEIR MIDST.
THE GAMES WOULD HAVE BEEN
EXTREMELY WALKABLE FOR 90% OF
THE FANS COMING INTO THE BOSTON.
BUT BECAUSE THE ECONOMIC
ARGUMENT KEPT GOING, A LOT OF
FEAR WAS INTRODUCED, AND BIDS
DON'T USUALLY GET THEIR ECONOMIC
NUMBERS WELL WORKED OUT UNTIL
WELL INTO THE INTERNATIONAL
PHASE WHICH DOESN'T START TILL
SEPTEMBER.
BOSTON WAS AT A GREAT
DISADVANTAGE.
IT HAD GONE THROUGH A DOMESTIC
PHASE, THEN JUST LOOKING AT
PRELIMINARY NUMBERS.
PROFESSOR ZIMBALIST AND DEMPSEY
AND OTHERS ATTACKED THE NUMBERS
AND KEPT THE PUBLIC FOCUSED ON
RISK AND FEAR.
SO THE PEOPLE HAVEN'T HAD A
CHANCE TO LOOK AT THE OVERALL
BENEFITS AND ASPECTS THAT MIGHT
HAVE BEEN DELIVERED IN THE GAME.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO MOVE ON
TO THE LARGER THE QUESTION WE
RAISED BURKS PROFESSOR SYSTEM
ZIMBALIST, LET ME GIVE YOU AN
OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND.
>> I WANT TO THANK GEORGE FOR
MAKING ME OUT TO BE SO POWERFUL.
I DON'T THINK WE HAD NEARLY THAT
IMPACT, BUT, LOOK, HERE'S THE
REALITY, EVERY SINGLE OLYMPIC
GAME SINCE 1960 THAT WE HAVE
FINANCIAL DATA FOR HAS HAD A
COST OVERRUN.
THE AVERAGE COST OVERRUN OF THE
SUMMER OLYMPICS SINCE 1980 HAS
BEEN 3.5 TIMES WHICH MEANS IF
YOU COMPARE THE INITIAL BID
NUMBERS TO THE FINAL NUMBERS YOU
HAVE TO MULTIPLY THEM BY 3.5.
THEY TALK ABOUT THE LAST THREE
OLYMPIC GAMES IN THE UNITED
STATES WERE IN SUR PLAYS, IN
PROFIT, THEY SAY.
IN FACT, THERE ARE THREE BUCKETS
OF MONEY THAT GETS SPENT HOSTING
THE OLYMPICS.
THE FIRST BUCKET IS THE
OPERATIONS BUDGET OF THE 17 DAYS
OF THE GAMES.
THEN THERE IS THE VENUE BUDGET,
THEN AN INFRASTRUCTURE BUCKET.
THE LAST THREE GAMES HAD A SUR
PLURKS BUT NOT AN OVERALL
SURPLUS AND DOESN'T MEAN A LOT
OF PUBLIC MONEY IS GOING INTO
THE GAMES.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU WANT TO
RESPOND, GEORGE?
THEN WE'LL MOVE ON TO TBIRG
QUESTION.
>> THE OBVIOUS EXAMPLE I CAN
TALK ABOUT ARE THE ECONOMICS OF
ATLANTA, A LITTLE BIT,
ANECDOTALLY.
SINCE THE FLAME WENT OUT IN
ATLANTA, JUDY -- AND BY THE WAY,
THE VENUES WERE BUILT OUT OF
MARKETING RE REVENUES IN ATLANT.
THERE WASN'T A SEPARATE BUCKET
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT, AS
PROFESSOR ZIMBALIST SAID.
WE BUILT EIGHT COMPETITION
VENUES FOR $520 MILLION OUT OF
THE MARKETING REVENUES FOR THE
ATLANTA GAMES AND STILL ENDED UP
WITH A PROFIT.
SINCE THE FLAME WENT OUT IN
ATLANTA, JUDY, THERE HAVE BEEN
$3.2 MILLION OF INVESTMENTS
AROUND CENTENNIAL OLYMPIC PARK
THAT SERVED AS A CATALYST OF THE
ECONOMIC REDEVELOPMENT OF
DOWNTOWN ATLANTA.
LAST YEAR WE HOPPED THE CENTER
OF HILL AND HUMAN RIGHTS NEXT TO
COKE, THE GEORGIA AQUARIUM,
GEEKS TO HOTELS AND CONDOS AND
BUSINESSES ALL OF WHICH CAME TO
ATLANTA BECAUSE TO HAVE THE
OLYMPIC GAMES.
PROFESSOR ZIMBALIST MIGHT ADD
THAT THE GAMES DON'T HELP RAISE
THE IMAGE OF THE CITY
INTERNATIONALLY.
TODAY ATLANTA HAS 18
FORTUNE 500S HEADQUARTERED HERE,
UP FROM 12 BEFORE THE GAMES,
PRIMARILY BECAUSE OF THE IMAGE
ENHANCEMENT WE GOT OUT OF THE
OLYMPIC GAMES.
>> THIS REMINDS ME OR THE
STORY --
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO BROND
THIS OUT, AND ASK YOU, IS YOUR
ARGUMENT THAT THERE'S A BETTER
MODEL FOR DECIDING WHERE THE
GAMES GO OR THAT THE U.S.
SHOULDN'T BE BIDDING FOR THEM,
PERIOD?
>> I THINK IT'S A VERY DIFFICULT
PROPOSITION TO COME OUT
ECONOMICALLY NEUTRAL WHEN YOU
HOST THESE GAMES, VERY
DIFFICULT.
LOS ANGELES OBVIOUSLY DID IT IN
1984 UNDER VERY SPECIAL
CIRCUMSTANCES.
I THINK BARCELONA ACHIEVED SOME
POSITIVE ECONOMIC RESULTS FROM
HOSTING IN 1992.
ALSO BECAUSE OF SOME VERY
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
I WOULDN'T SAY YOU SHOULD NEVER
BID.
I THINK IT'S POSSIBLE THAT A
LOS ANGELES BID MIGHT MAKE
SENSE.
THEY HAVE MOST TO HAVE THE VENUE
INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE
TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE
ALREADY IN PLACE, SO THE AMOUNT
OF INVESTMENT THEY WOULD HAVE TO
MAKE WOULD BE QUITE SMALL.
THAT'S SOMETHING WE HAVE TO SEE
WHEN THE PLANS DEVELOP AND
WHETHER OR NOT MAYOR GARCETTI IS
WILLING TO SIGN THE GUARANTEE TO
THE I.O.C. THAT THEY WILL COVER
COST OVERRUNS OR REVENUE
SHORTFALLS.
>> Woodruff: GEORGE, IS THERE
A BETTER MODEL?
CLEARLY, SOME CITIES HAVE
STRUGGLED WITH THE COST THAT IS
REQUIRED TO PUT THESE GAMES ON,
AND THERE ARE REAL QUESTIONS.
THERE WERE QUESTIONS IN BOSTON.
>> THERE ARE NEW MODELS, JUDY,
AND BOSTON WOULD HAVE INVENTED A
NEW MODEL, I'M SURE, IN LINE
WITH THE AGENDA 2020 REFORMS
THAT THE INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC
COMMITTEE HAS RECENTLY BEGUN TO
IMPLEMENT.
BUT FORETHA FORGET THAT, THERE A
BETTER STORY, THE STORY OF THE
OLYMPIC MOVEMENT AND ITS VALUE
TO OUR WORLD, AND YOU NEVER HEAR
ABOUT IT IN THE ECONOMIC,
FINANCIAL RISK STORIES OF THE
OPPONENTS OF THE GAMES.
RIGHT NOW, THE OLYMPIC MOVEMENT
IS AT WORK IN 200 COUNTRIES
AROUND THE WORLD, 365 DAYS A
YEAR, INSTILL THE VALUES OF
EXCELLENCE, FRIENDSHIP AND
RESPECT, RESPECT FOR OPPONENTS,
OTHER CULTURES, DIFFERENCES, AND
IN MILLIONS OF YOUNG CHILDREN
AROUND THE WORLD.
IN OUR WORLD, WE NEED A POSITIVE
FORCE AT WORK AROUND THE WORLD.
THE OLYMPIC MOVEMENT INVESTS A
BILLION DOLLARS EVERY YEAR IN
DEVELOPMENT OF SPORT AROUND THE
WORLD AND THAT MONEY FLOWS
DIRECTLY FROM THE SPONSORSHIPS
AND BROADCAST RIGHTS SOLD FOR
THE CITIES THAT ARE HOSTING THE
GAMES.
SO MONEY FROM THE HOST CITIES IN
ORDER TO DEVELOP SPORT GLOBALLY.
I WOULD LIKE TO KNOW WHAT THE
VALUE OF DEVELOPMENT OF SPORT,
GIVING KIDS TO CHOOSE SPORT,
WHAT'S THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
OF THAT?
>> Woodruff: LET ME TURN IN
THE LITTLE TIME WE HAVE, ANDREW
ZIMBALIST, WHAT ABOUT THIS
BIGGER BI BENEFIT YOU HEAR
MR. HIRTHLER DESCRIBING.
WHAT DOESN'T THAT OUTWEIGH SOME
OF THE FINANCIAL QUESTIONS
YOU'RE FOCUSED ON?
>> LOOK, THE OLYMPIC MOVEMENT IS
A GOOD THING.
OLYMPIC VALUES IS A GOOD THING.
NOBODY IS CONTESTING THAT.
IS ISSUE WE'RE TALKING ABOUT IS
WHETHER OR NOT IT MAKES ECONOMIC
SENSE FOR CITIES TO HOST THE
LOIRCHG GAMES, WHETHER OR NOT --
THOSE THE OLYMPIC GAMES, WHETHER
OR NOT IT PAYS OFF TO DO THAT.
ALL OF THE ACADEMIC LITERATURE,
ALL OF THE SERIOUS, UNPAID FOR
LITERATURE, FINDS IT'S NOT A
GOOD INVESTMENT FOR CITIES TO
MAKE.
THAT'S THE ARGUMENT I'M
REPRESENTING HERE.
>> ALL RIGHT, WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO LEAVE IT THERE.
WE THANK YOU BOTH FOR JOINING
US, ANDREW ZIMBALIST AND GEORGE
HIRTHLER.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US.
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR:
SLAVERY, THEFT AND LAWLESSNESS
IN INTERNATIONAL WATERS AND, OH
THE THINGS YOU CAN READ-- HOW A
ONCE LOST DR. SEUSS BOOK GOT
PUBLISHED.
>> Ifill: THIS MONTH MARKED THE
70TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FIRST
TEST OF A NUCLEAR BOMB.
IT WAS A MILESTONE FOR SCIENCE,
AND CREDITED WITH LEADING TO THE
END OF WORLD WAR TWO.
BUT ONE GROUP ISN'T CELEBRATING.
THEY CALL THEMSELVES THE
DOWNWINDERS BECAUSE THEY LIVED
DOWNWIND OF THE BLAST SITE.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KATHLEEN
McCLEERY REPORTS FROM SOUTH
CENTRAL NEW MEXICO.
>> Reporter: THE SOLEMN READING
OF NAMES AT A CANDLELIGHT VIGIL.
THIS ONE WITH TRADITIONAL NEW
MEXICAN LUMINARIAS IS IN A
BASEBALL FIELD IN THE VILLAGE OF
TULAROSA.
THESE ARE VICTIMS OF A DIFFERENT
KIND OF LOSS.
>> THERE'S JUST-- JUST TOO MUCH
CANCER HERE.
SO MANY TEARS.
>> Reporter: GLORIA HERRERA
KNOWS ABOUT CANCER FROM HER
FRIENDS, HER NEIGHBORS AND HER
HUSBAND, HENRY, WHO'S HAD THREE
DIFFERENT KINDS.
THE HERRARAS BLAME THE DISEASE
ON A DAY ETCHED IN HENRY'S
MEMORY.
HE WAS 11 YEARS OLD.
>> KABOOM, THAT THING EXPLODED
AND I MEAN IT WAS A BIG
EXPLOSION.
IT WASN'T LIKE THESE REGULAR
ONES WE'D BE HEARING.
>> Reporter: IN JULY 1945,
SCIENTISTS WORKED IN SECRET ON
THE WORLD'S FIRST ATOMIC BOMB IN
A PART OF NEW MEXICO'S DESERT
CALLED JORNADA DEL MUERTO OR
JOURNEY OF DEATH.
THEY HOISTED A 19 KILOTON DEVICE
CALLED THE GADGET ON TOP OF A
100 FOOT TOWER.
AT 5:29 IN THE MORNING ON JULY
16TH, A TREMENDOUS FLASH CAME
FIRST, AND THEN A MUSHROOM CLOUD
STRETCHED SEVEN MILES HIGH.
IT WAS THE SAME SIZE AND POWER
AS THE PLUTONIUM BOMB THAT WOULD
BE DROPPED 24 DAYS LATER ON THE
JAPANESE CITY OF NAGASAKI
KILLING TENS OF THOUSANDS.
JULY IS THE RAINY SEASON IN NEW
MEXICO.
HOURS AFTER THE BLAST, THE SKIES
OPENED UP.
NO ONE TOLD RESIDENTS TO
EVACUATE, EVEN AS RADIOACTIVE
ASH POURED DOWN ON LIVESTOCK,
CROPS, WATER CISTERNS AND
LAUNDRY HANGING ON LINES.
>> IT WAS JUST BLACK, BLACK,
REAL, REAL FINE DUST, CAUSE
MOMMA HAD JUST HUNG UP HER
CLOTHES, WHITE SHEETS AND
PILLOWCASES AND THE WHITE
CLOTHES SHE WASHED FIRST.
>> AND IT WAS ON THE ROOF.
WE GOT IT INTO THE-- THE
CISTERN.
T WAIS ON OUR FOOD.
IT WAS ON OUR CHICKENS, OUR
COWS, OUR RABBITS.
>> Reporter: A 2010 REPORT FROM
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
EXAMINED RADIOACTIVE FALLOUT
FROM SEVERAL NUCLEAR TESTS.
FOR TRINITY, THE STUDY FOUND
SOME RADIATION LEVELS WERE:
"ALMOST 10,000 TIMES WHAT IS
CURRENTLY ALLOWED IN PUBLIC
AREAS."
PEOPLE HERE BELIEVE THE
RADIATION CAUSED A SPIKE IN
NUMEROUS CANCERS AMONG THOSE WHO
LIVED DOWNWIND OF THE SITE.
>> THERE ISN'T A FAMILY IN
TULAROSA.
I'LL BET YOU TEN DOLLARS TO A
DOUGHNUT, THAT DON'T HAVE
SOMEBODY IN THEIR FAMILY WITH
CANCER, MAYBE ONE TWO MAYBE THE
WHOLE FAMILY YOU KNOW.
>> WE WERE THE FIRST PEOPLE THAT
THE ATOMIC BOMB WAS USED ON.
WE WERE THE FIRST DOWNWINDE.RS
THE GOVERNMENT CAME INTO OUR
BACKYARD AND USED US AS GUINEA
PIGS, THEY EXPERIMENTED WITH US.
AND THEY LEFT.
>> Reporter: THE HINKLE FAMILY
WAS ONE OF THE HARDEST HIT.
EDNA KAY HINKLE IS A BREAST AND
SKIN CANCER SURVIVOR.
HER GRANDPARENTS HAD A RANCH 27
MILES AWAY FROM THE BLAST SITE.
>> MY DAD AND HIS UNCLE WERE OUT
THERE, SLEEPING ON THE FRONT
PORCH AND THE-- A BOMB WENT OFF
AND WOKE THEM UP.
AND THEY SAW THE MUSHROOM.
EVERY ONE OF MY GRANDPARENTS'
KIDS WERE AFFECTED.
WHY WERE THERE 14 IN THAT ONE
FAMILY, YOU KNOW, AND THEN YOU
ADD GRANNY'S SIBLINGS, WELL
THERE'S 20 IN ONE FAMILY.
THAT'S A LOT OF CANCER.
>> MY BROTHER DIED OF CANCER.
MY OLDEST SON FROM MY FIRST
MARRIAGE HAD A BRAIN TUMOR.
IT WAS A VERY RARE TUMOR.
>> Reporter: RAY CORDOVA IS THE
MAYOR OF TULAROSA, WHICH SITS
AROUND 40 MILES FROM GROUND
ZERO, POPULATION ABOUT 3,000.
HE SAYS THE NUMBERS AFFECTED BY
CANCER ARE CLIMBING.
MOST AMERICANS HAVE FAMILY AND
FRIENDS WHO HAVE BATTLED CANCER.
ONE IN TWO MEN AND ONE IN THREE
WOMEN WILL CONTRACT THE DISEASE
DURING THEIR LIFETIMES.
BUT ARE CANCER RATES HIGHER HERE
IN THE TOWNS AND VILLAGES NEAR
THE TRINITY TEST SITE?
>> IF YOU LIKE THE ANALOGY OF
WAR ON CANCER, WE ARE THE PEOPLE
WHO ARE DRAWING THE MAP FOR THAT
WAR.
>> Reporter: CHUCK WIGGINS HEADS
THE NEW MEXICO TUMOR REGISTRY,
AND HIS DATA DOES NOT SHOW
HIGHER CANCER RATES IN THE AREA
AROUND THE TEST SITE.
>> WHEN YOU COMPARE ANGLOS IN
THE TRINITY SITE AREA TO ANGLOS
IN OTHER PARTS OF NEW MEXICO,
THE RATES ARE REALLY QUITE
SIMILAR.
SAME WITH HISPANICS AND NATIVES,
THE RATES REALLY ARE-- ARE QUITE
SIMILAR TO OTHER PARTS IN THE
STATE.
>> Reporter: WIGGINS SAYS THERE
IS A LINK BETWEEN RADIATION AND
CERTAIN CANCERS.
BUT EXPOSURE CAN OCCUR IN MANY
WAYS, FOR EXAMPLE: X-RAYS AND
OTHER DIAGNOSTIC TESTS, FLYING
IN AIRPLANES, TANNING OR SMOKING
CIGARETTES.
>> CANCER IS THE LEADING CAUSE,
ONE OF THE LEADING CAUSES OF
ILLNESS AND DEATH IN NEW MEXICO.
WHAT I WOULD SAY IS THAT THAT'S
TRUE IN TULAROSA, IT'S ALSO TRUE
IN SANTA FE COUNTY AND MANY
OTHER COUNTIES THROUGHOUT THE
STATE.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT ARGUMENT
DOESN'T FLY IN TULAROSA.
>> I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT.
NOT FOR ONE MINUTE.
>> Reporter: TINA CORDOVA-- THE
MAYOR'S NIECE AND A THYROID
CANCER SURVIVOR-- HAS ORGANIZED
THE TULAROSA BASIN DOWNWINDERS
CONSORTIUM.
THEY'VE COLLECTED HEALTH SURVEYS
FROM HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE AND
COMPILED NAMES OF THE DEAD.
GLORIA HERRERA IS ONE OF THE
LIST-MAKERS.
>> WHAT IF I GIVE YOU A LIST OF
285 PEOPLE THAT WE KNOW, WE'VE
ATTENDED THEIR FUNERALS, WE'VE
SEEN THEM, WE'VE GONE TO TAKE
FOOD TO THE FAMILIES.
285 PEOPLE THAT WE KNOW OF, AND
THERE'S PROBABLY MORE.
>> OUR GOAL HAS ALWAYS BEEN
BASICALLY TWO THINGS: NUMBER ONE
TO GET THE GOVERNMENT TO
ACKNOWLEDGE AND APOLOGIZE TO THE
PEOPLE IN ALL OF THESE SMALL
COMMUNITIES, IN AND AROUND
TRINITY, AND THE NUMBER TWO: TO
INCLUDE US IN THE RADIATION
EXPOSURE COMPENSATION ACT.
>> Reporter: THAT ACT-- PASSED
BY CONGRESS IN 1990-- APOLOGIZED
AND AWARDED $50,000 TO $100,000
TO MINERS AND PARTICIPANTS
EXPOSED TO RADIATION IN NEARLY
200 NUCLEAR WEAPONS TESTS.
BUT DOWNWINDERS WERE ONLY
COMPENSATED IN THREE STATES:
NEVADA, UTAH AND ARIZONA.
>> THEY FORGOT ABOUT NEW MEXICO.
>> THEY DIDN'T DO NOTHING ABOUT
US.
>> THEY FORGOT ALL ABOUT NEW
MEXICO.
>> NOTHING.
ZILCH.
>> Reporter: IT WILL NOW TAKE A
CONGRESSIONAL AMENDMENT TO
CHANGE THAT.
SOMETHING SENATOR TOM UDALL HAS
WORKED ON SINCE HE WAS ELECTED
TO CONGRESS IN 1998.
THIS YEAR, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF
THE TRINITY TEST, HE AGAIN URGED
HIS COLLEAGUES TO MAKE AMENDS TO
THE PEOPLE OF HIS STATE.
>> THEY DESERVE JUSTICE.
THEY DESERVE COMPENSATION.
AND THEY ARE STILL WAITING.
70 YEARS LATER.
STILL WAITING.
>> Reporter: PEOPLE IN TULAROSA
AREN'T COUNTING ON GETTING A
CHECK FROM THE GOVERNMENT ANY
TIME SOON.
>> THERE'S NOT ENOUGH MONEY IN
THIS WHOLE WIDE WORLD TO
COMPENSATE THE PEOPLE IN
TULAROSA, WE COULD FILL A LAKE
WITH THE TEARS AND THE PRAYERS.
>> Reporter: AT THE WHITE SANDS
MISSILE RANGE, AN OBELISK MARKS
THE SPOT WHERE THE BOMB STOOD.
THE RANCH HOUSE WHERE IT WAS
ASSEMBLED IS TWO MILES AWAY.
TINY PIECES OF GREEN GLASS
LITTER THE GROUND, MELTED SAND
THAT'S STILL SLIGHTLY
RADIOACTIVE.
THE NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE IS
EMBARKING ON AN ASSESSMENT OF
WHAT PEOPLE ATE AND HOW THEY
LIVED IN AN EFFORT TO DETERMINE
HOW MUCH RADIATION THEY GOT.
BUT THOSE RESULTS AREN'T
EXPECTED UNTIL AT LEAST 2017.
IN TULAROSA, THERE'S SKEPTICISM
ABOUT A GOVERNMENT STUDY.
>> THE CANCER INSTITUTE IS
COMING TO QUESTION US?
70 YEARS LATER?
WHAT HAPPENED TEN YEARS
AFTERWARDS?
20?
>> THINK ABOUT HOW MANY PEOPLE
WE'VE LOST THIS YEAR.
I'M NOT CERTAIN WE NEED MORE
STUDIES.
IN MY MIND, WHAT WE NEED TO PUT
MONEY INTO IS COMPENSATION.
IS HEALTHCARE.
IS SCREENING, IS HELPING PEOPLE
WHO NEED HELP.
>> Reporter: I'M KATHLEEN
McCLEERY FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR IN
TULAROSA, NEW MEXICO.
>> Ifill: THE TRINITY SITE IS
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC ONLY TWICE A
YEAR, BUT YOU CAN TAKE A TOUR
WITH US IN A SLIDESHOW OF IMAGES
ON OUR WEB SITE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
AND, LATER TONIGHT ON PBS: A NEW
FILM TAKES AN IN-DEPTH LOOK AT
THE RACE TO PRODUCE THE FIRST
ATOMIC BOMB, THE ETHICS OF USING
A WEAPON THAT COULD END HUMAN
CIVILIZATION, AND THE LIVES OF
THOSE WHO BUILT IT.
"THE BOMB" AIRS TONIGHT ON MOST
PBS STATIONS.
>> Woodruff: NOW A LOOK AT SOME
UNCHARTED WATERS AND THE DANGERS
FACED BY THOSE OUT AT SEA.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM REPORTS.
A WARNING: THE STORY CONTAINS
SOME GRAPHIC IMAGES.
>> Reporter: IT'S EASY TO
OVERLOOK JUST HOW DEPENDENT OUR
LIVES AND THE ENTIRE GLOBAL
ECONOMY HAVE BECOME ON SHIPPING
AND THE SEAS.
TODAY, SEVERAL MILLIONHIPS S
CARRY ROUGHLY 90% OF THE WORLD'S
GOODS.
BUT A "NEW YORK TIMES" SERIES
SHOWS HOW LITTLE WE KNOW ABOUT
"THE LAWLESS SEAS."
MIGRANTS, STOWAWAYS AND
FISHERMEN DISAPPEAR-- OFTEN
KILLED IN ACCIDENTS, OR WORSE--
THERE'S EVIDENCE OF MURDERS
TAKING PLACE OFFSHORE.
AND TENS OF THOUSANDS OF WORKERS
ARE ESSENTIALLY ENSLAVED EACH
YEAR.
ALL THE WHILE, INTERNATIONAL
MARITIME LAW SEEMS WHOLLY
INADEQUATE AND FEW AUTHORITIES
EVER STEP IN.
IAN URBINA REPORTED THIS SERIES
AND HE JOINS ME NOW.
IN THE FIRST PART OF YOUR SERIES
YOU TALK ABOUT A PARTICULAR
SHIP, "THE DONA LABERTA," AND
YOU DOCUMENT A WHOLE MANNER OF
CRIMES, TREATMENT OF CREW,
STOWAWAYS OVERBOARD, DUMPING
OILY RESIDUE INTO THE WATER, YOU
CAN NAME THE OWNER OF THE SHIP,
BUT NOTHING IS DONE, WHY IS
THAT?
>> NUMBER ONE: A LOT OF THESE
COMPANIES ARE P.O. BOXES AND
SHELLS OF SHELLS OF SHELLS AND
THAT WAS THE CASE HERE.
SO JUST PINNING DOWN THE OWING
COMPANY WAS TOUGH.
SECONDLY YOU HAVE A BOAT THAT
HAS TEN DIFFERENT NATIONALITIES,
IN TERMS OF THE CREW, THE
CAPTAIN FROM ANOTHER NATION, THE
COMPANY, A THIRD NATION, IT'S
FLAGGED TO A FOURTH NATION AND
PASSING THROUGH INTL WATERS--
FIGURING OUT WHO WOULD PROSECUTE
OR INVESTIGATE A CRIME IS TOUGH.
AND THE LAST PART IS NO ONE
WANTING TO INVESTIGATE THESE
MATTERS, WHEN CRIMES OCCUR, IT'S
USUALLY AGAINST CREW, THE
ENVIRONMENT, THE CREW ARE FROM
POOR COUNTRIES AND THOSE
COUNTRIES DON'T HAVE THE
WHEREWITHAL TO PROSECUTE.
>> Reporter: IS THERE A
GOVERNING BODY, AN ORGANIZATION
THAT IS SUPPOSED TO HAVE
JURISDICTION OVER THESE MATTERS?
>> THE FLAG THAT SHIP FLIES THAT
ULTIMATELY THE COUNTRY THAT
SHOULD TAKE RESPONSIBILITY, BUT
THOSE FLAGS ARE BUSINESSES AND
THEY DON'T HAVE ENFORCEMENT
WINGS, THEY DON'T HAVE POLICE,
THEY DON'T HAVE INVESTIGATORS,
AND THEY DON'T HAVE MUCH
INCENTIVE REALLY TO INVESTIGATE
THEIR CLIENTS.
THERE ARE OVERARCHING BODIES
LIKE AT THE U.N. AND THE
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME AGENCY,
BUT AGAIN IT'S NOT AN
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY SO COMPLAINTS
HAVE BEEN FILED, BUT THEY
USUALLY SIT THERE ON RECORD.
>> Reporter: YOU DOCUMENT IN
YOUR SERIES SOME, THE CONDITIONS
FOR FISHING BOAT WORKERS, AND
VIDEO?
THE WAY YOU DESCRIBE IT IS MANY
OF THESE WORKERS ARE IN ESSENCE
SLAVES, WHO ARE THESE MEN AND
HOW DID THEY END UP IN THE
CIRCUMSTANCES THAT THEY'RE IN?
>> THAT'S A STORY WE FOCUSED ON
IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA WHERE
THIS PROBLEM IS MOST ACUTE, MOST
OF THE VESSELS WE LOOKED AT WERE
THAI FLAGGED TRAWLERS, FISHING
VESSELS, THEY ARE SMALLER BOATS,
AND THE CREWS COME FROM
PREDOMINANTLY LAOS, CAMBODIA AND
THERE ARE MANY BURMESE.
AND THEY ARE TRAFFICKED INTO THE
COUNTRY OVER THE BORDER
ILLEGALLY-- OFTEN UNDER THE
PRETENSE THEY WILL GET A JOB IN
CONSTRUCTION OR SOME LAND BASED
JOB.
NEXT THING THEY KNOW THEY ARE AT
THE PORT AND THEY ARE SHUTTLED
ONTO A SHIP AND THE TRAFFICKERS
ESSENTIALLY SELL THEM TO THE
BOAT CAPTAIN, AND THEY ARE
INDENTURED ON THE BOAT AND
WORKING TILL THEIR DEBT IS
CLEARED, BUT ONCE YOU GET OUT TO
SEA, IT'S NOT A REALM OF
BOOKKEEPING, EXACT ACCOUNT.
>> Reporter: YOU CAN'T JUST GET
OFF.
>> RIGHT, SO THEY STAY THERE.
>> Reporter: YOU DOCUMENT A
HORRIBLE INCIDENT THAT HAPPENED
I BELIEVE IN THE INDIAN OCEAN,
THIS VERY GRAPHIC CELL PHONE
VIDEO OF MEN BEING SHOT IN THE
WATER, THIS IS PRETTY CLEAR
EVIDENCE OF A GRAPHIC, HORRIBLE
CRIME, HOW COME NO ONE IS HELD
TO ACCOUNT FOR THIS?
HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THAT?
>> IT'S PRETTY AMAZING, THIS
CELL PHONE VIDEO THAT WAS FOUND.
IT SHOWS A CLEAR CASE OF MURDER.
THERE ARE FOUR MEN FLOATING IN
THE WATER, AND OVER TEN MINUTES
THEY ARE SHOT, AT THE END OF THE
VIDEO AND THE MOST STRIKING
PART, THOSE INVOLVED IN THE
SHOOTING ARE TAKING SELFIES.
>> Reporter: THEY'VE JUST SHOT
MEN TO DEATH, IN THE WATER, AND
HERE THEY ARE TAKING SELFIES OF
THEMSELVES.
>> AND THE VIDEO ENDS UP ON THE
INTERNET, SO THE QUESTION IS HOW
IS IT POSSIBLE WITH THIS MUCH
EVIDENCE, THERE WERE FOUR LARGE
TUNA, LONG-LINE VESSELS IN THE
AREA, SO THAT MEANS THERE WERE
DOZENS OF WITNESSES, WITH THE
VIDEO ON THE INTERNET WITH THE
CULPRITS.
IT GETS TO THE HEART OF THE
ISSUE THAT YOU RAISED BEFORE:
THERE IS NO INTERESTED PARTY
THAT HAS THE WHEREWITHAL TO
PROSECUTE OR INVESTIGATE, AND AT
THE END OF THE DAY THE SEAS ARE
THIS SPRAWLING SPACE, AND SO
PINNING DOWN WHEN AND WHERE
THINGS OCCURS OUT THERE WHEN
THERE ARE SO FEW OTHER PEOPLE
THAT WEREN'T PARTY TO THE CRIME-
- IS DIFFICULT
>> Reporter: THE ENVIRONMENTAL
CRIMES YOU DOCUMENT ARE ALSO
QUITE STARK.
YOU WRITE:
WHAT IS BEING DONE TO COMBAT
THOSE TYPES OF CRIMES?
>> NOT A WHOLE LOT BECAUSE WHILE
THERE ARE RULES ON THE BOOKS,
RULES ARE ONLY AS GOOD AS THEIR
ENFORCEMENT.
AND THAT'S WHERE THE HIGH SEAS
BECOME ESPECIALLY DIFFICULT,
BECAUSE IT'S SUPER COSTLY TO PUT
BOATS ON THE WATER, IT'S SUCH A
HUGE AREA TO PATROL AND NO
NATION HAS THE JURISDICTION TO
DO THAT ON THE HIGH SEAS BECAUSE
IT BELONGS TO EVERYONE AND NO
ONE, SO THERE ARE STRONG RULES
ON THE BOOKS FORBIDDING THAT
KIND OF BEHAVIOR, BUT THERE IS
NO ONE THERE TO STOP IT.
>> Reporter: IAN URBINA OF "THE
NEW YORK TIMES," THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: FINALLY, DR. SEUSS'S
POPULAR EMPIRE IS ABOUT TO GROW
ONCE AGAIN.
A NEWLY PUBLISHED BOOK OF HIS
IMMEDIATELY SHOT UP TO NUMBER
ONE ON THE AMAZON BEST-SELLER
LIST DAY.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS MORE ON ITS
INTERESTING BACK STORY AND THE
ENDURING APPEAL OF THE
CHILDREN'S AUTHOR.
>> Brown: AH, THE CHOICES THAT
LIFE PRESENTS.
FOR EXAMPLE:
"WE WANT A PET.
WE WANT A PET.
WHAT KIND OF PET
SHOULD WE GET?"
THE OPENING LINES OF A "NEW"
BOOK.
ACTUALLY, AN OLDOOK, B NEVER
FINISHED--UNTIL NOW-- BY THEODOR
GEISEL, WHO AS "DR. SEUSS,"
WROTE AND ILLUSTRATED SUCH
CLASSIC CHILDREN'S BOOKS AS "THE
CAT IN THE HAT" AND "GREEN EGGS
AND HAM".
44 BOOKS IN HIS LIFETIME-- HE
DIED IN 1991-- THAT HAVE SOLD
MORE THAN 650 MILLION COPIES AND
COUNTING.
NOW COMES "WHAT PET SHOULD I
GET," DISCOVERED IN A BOX IN
2013 AND COMPLETED BY CATHY
GOLDSMITH, WHO WORKED WITH
THEODOR GEISEL AS A DESIGNER AND
ART DIRECTOR FOR HIS LAST SIX
BOOKS.
SHE CONTINUES TO WORK AT RANDOM
HOUSE, WHICH HAS JUST PUBLISHED
THE NEW BOOK.
ALSO WITH US IS AUTHOR AND
ILLUSTRATOR GREG PIZZOLI.
HIS DEBUT PICTURE BOOK, "THE
WATERMELON SEED," WON THE
THEODOR SEUSS GEISEL AWARD IN
2014.
>> Brown: SO CATHY GOLDSMITH,
LET ME START WITH YOU.
LET ME ASK, WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF
THIS BOOK AND WHAT SHOULD WE
MAKE OF THIS BOOK?
WHY DID THEODOR GEISEL SET IT
ASIDE?
>> WELL, I THINK HE SET IT ASIDE
MOSTLY BECAUSE HE GOT INVOLVED
IN OTHER THINGS.
HE WAS FAMOUS FOR ALWAYS WORKING
ON MORE THAN ONE PROJECT AT A
TIME, AND I JUST THINK THIS WAS
ONE THAT HE WROTE AND MOVED OPEN
ALMOST IMMEDIATELY AFTERWARDS TO
"ONE FISH, TWO FISH."
>> Brown: HOW MUCH WORK DID
YOU HAVE TO DO ON IT TO BRING IT
TO PUBLICATION?
>> WELL, IN THE BOX, WE FOUND
THE COMPLETE LINE ART AND
MANUSCRIPT.
WHAT WE DID NOT FIND WERE THE
COLOR SPECS FOR THE BOOK.
>> Brown: THEREFORE, WHAT DID
YOU DO?
>> SO I BACKED OUT TO TRY TO
WORK OUT A COLOR SCHEME FOR THIS
BOOK THAT WOULD BE CONSISTENT
WITH WHAT TED HIMSELF MIGHT HAVE
DONE IF HE WERE STILL WITH US
TODAY.
>> Brown: WHICH MEANT LOOK AT
THAT TIME WORK AROUND THAT TIME?
HOW DID YOU FIGURE IT OUT?
>> BECAUSE IT'S SO CLOSELY
RELATED TO ONE FISH TWO FISH, I
STARTED WITH THE COLOR PALLET
FOR THAT BOOK AND WORKED OUT
WHAT NEEDED TO HAPPEN IN THIS
BOOK TO MAKE THIS BOOKWORK.
>> Brown: THERE ARE TWO
CHILDREN IN THE BOOK, TRYING TO
DECIDE ON A PET, START WITH A
DOG AND CAT AND THEN, IN
DR. SEUSS FASHION, IMAGINE EVER
MORE EXTRAVAGANT TYPES OF
ANIMALS.
WHAT DID YOU SEE IN THIS BOOK?
>> WELL, I'M A CAT PERSON, SO I
WAS HOPING FOR THE CAT, BUT I'VE
FOUND THE DR. SEUSS I'VE LOVED
SINCE I WAS A CHILD, THE FUN,
RHYMING TEXT, THE AMAZING
ILLUSTRATIONS AND THE DR. SEUSS
THAT WE ALL LOVE.
>> Brown: TELL US MORE.
WHAT ACCOUNTS FOR THAT LOVE OR
THAT LEADERSHIP?
>> WELL, I THINK, YOU KNOW, IN
PARTICULARLY, WHEN PEOPLE THINK
OF DR. SEUSS, THEY THINK OF HIS
RHYME TO VERSE, THEY HAVE A VERY
PARTICULAR IMAGINATIVE QUALITY
THEY HAVE WITH LANGUAGE.
AS AN ILLUSTRATOR MYSELF, I WAS
LOOKING AT THE BOOK TODAY AND
JUST MARVELING AT THE PEN AND
INK ILLUSTRATIONS, AND HOW HE
WAS ABLE TO DO SO MUCH IN THE
ILLUSTRATION THAT WASN'T BEING
SAID IN THE TEXT ITSELF.
AS CATHY SAID, THE COLORS LOOK
GREAT.
GREAT JOB.
>> THANK YOU FOR THAT.
>> Brown: THE LINE GOT ME AND
BROUGHT ME BACK TO READING
DR. SEUSS AS A KID WHEN HE SAYS,
"OH, BOY, IT IS SOMETHING TO
MAKE A MIND UP."
YOU KNOW THAT'S CORRECT VERY
HUMAN MOMENT OR I CAN'T DECIDE
BUT I HAVE TO DECIDE.
>> YES, I THINK THIS IS IT NOT
ONLY ABOUT CHOOSING A PET BUT
MAKING A CHOICE AND IT'S A
PROBLEM CHILDREN AND ADULTS HAVE
THROUGHOUT THEIR LIVES AT
VARIOUS TIMES.
>> Brown: TELL US MORE, CATHY
GOLDSMITH, ABOUT DR. SEUSS OR
THEODOR GEISEL, THE MAN.
HE'S DESCRIBED OFTEN AS A
PERFECTIONIST.
I SAW WHERE HE SAID, I KNOW MY
STUFF LOOKS LIKE IT WAS RATTLED
OFF IN 28 SECONDS, BUT EVERY
WORD IS A STRUGGLE AND EVERY
SENTENCE IS LIKE THE PANGS OF
BIRTH.
THAT'S QUOTING HIM.
>> WELL, THAT IS A QUOTE THAT HE
MADE, YES.
AND I THINK IT REALLY DESCRIBED
THE WAY HE WORKED.
HE WROTE AND REWROTE AND REDREW
AND SELDOM ACTUALLY SHARED A
PROJECT WITH THOSE OF US AT
RANDOM HOUSE UNTIL HE WAS WELL
INTO IT AND KNEW THAT HE WAS ON
THE PATH TO BEING FINISHED WITH
IT.
BUT HE ALSO EXPECTED THE SAME
THING OF THOSE AROUND HIM, WHICH
IS WHY WE TAKE TAKING CARE OF
HIS LEGACY SO SERIOUSLY AT
RANDOM HOUSE.
>> Brown: YOU WERE TALKING
ABOUT THE DRAWING ITSELF.
HE COULD HAVE DONE A LOT WITH
HIS ART.
I MEAN, HE COULD HAVE DONE MANY
OTHER THINGS BUT HE PUT IT IN
THE SERVICE OF CHILDREN'S BOOKS.
>> RIGHT.
HE DID POLITICAL CARTOONS DURING
WORLD WAR II.
HE WAS, YOU KNOW, A VERY
FANTASTIC SCULTER.
HE REALLY COULD HAVE DONE
ANYTHING, AND HE CHOSE
CHILDREN'S BOOKS.
HE SAW CHILDREN'S BOOKS,
CHILDREN'S PUBLISHING AS A
LEGITIMATE ART FORM WORTHY OF
HIS PARTICULAR GENIUS, AND
ELEVATED THE FIELDS.
I THINK HE SHOULD BE LARGELY
CREDITED FOR THE GOLDEN ERA OF
PICTURE BOOKS WE'RE SEEING
TODAY.
>> Brown: CATHY GOLDSMITH, ANY
RESERVATIONS?
WAS THERE AMBIVALENCE FOR YOU OR
FOR RANDOM HOUSE OR FOR HIS
WIDOW, FOR ANYBODY INVOLVED HERE
IN WINNING THIS TO THE PUBLIC?
>> NOT AT ALL.
WE HAVE A TREMENDOUS RESPECT FOR
THE LEGACY OF WHAT DR. SEUSS DID
WHEN HE LEFT US, AND WE WOULD
NOT HAVE PUBLISHED THIS BOOK IF
WE DID NOT FEEL IT FIT VERY
NICELY AND RE REPUTABLY WITHIN S
WORK.
>> Brown: IS THERE MORE
POSSIBLY TO COME?
>> THERE WAS NOTHING ELSE FOUND
IN THAT BOX THAT WAS COMPLETE
SO, NO, NO NEW OTHER NEW BOOKS
COMING DOWN THE LINE.
>> Brown: GREG?
SIGNALED THE IDEAS TO ME,
CATHY.
THAT'S FINE.
>> Brown: SEND THEM TO YOU?
YEAH, I'LL FIN THEM UP.
>> Brown: GREG PIZZOLI, CATHY
GOLDSMITH, THANK YOU BOTH SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
OUR "NEWSHOUR SHARES" OF THE
DAY.
SOMETHING THAT CAUGHT OUR EYE
WHICH MIGHT BE OF INTEREST TO
YOU, TOO.
OUR COLLEAGUES FROM KQED IN SAN
FRANCISCO PROFILED "VOCAL RUSH,"
A TEEN ACAPELLA GROUP FROM
OAKLAND, WHO USED THE STAGE TO
PAY HOMAGE TO THE BLACK LIVES
MATTER MOVEMENT AND ACKNOWLEDGE
THEIR OWN CITY'S TROUBLED
HISTORY.
ONE, TWO --
(SINGING)
>> "VOCAL RUSH" HAS ALWAYS BEEN
A GROUP OF DIVERSE KIDS.
IT'S SOMETHING WE'RE ALL PROUD
OF, TOO.
BUT THIS YEAR, THE FACT THAT
BLACK LIVE
>> Woodruff: YOU CAN FIND THE
FULL REPORT ON OUR ARTS BEAT
PAGE AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: ALSO ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, TWITTER MAY BE
ALSO ON THE "NewsHour", READ
HOW THE MICROMESSAGING SITE IS
CRACKING DOWN ON PLAGIARISM.
THAT'S ON OUR WEB SITE9 i s
NEWSHOUR HAS BEEN PROVIDED BY: